Ok so I have an important theoretical/computational neuroscience project in mind.

Here is the idea.

We don't understand the cerrebellum from a mechanistical point. 
The Parallel fibers CC->DCN->IO circuit with is pecculiar plasticity scheme seems 
to do ITS OWN THING without carring about the complex model computed from the cortex.

Seems like the cerebellum is a big machinery that mostly care about finding the right 
activity/plasticity pattern to inhibit the IO. But despite that the cerrebellum seem to be able to QUICKLY, on the fly correct mouvement.

To understand that you have to know the plasticity rule and the type of neurons (inhbitory/excitatory) which constitute this circuit. And also to know that even if 
parallel fibers and DCN contains input from the cortex they don't seem to have to be directly piloted from the cortex in a precise manner for the magic to happen. Taking for exemple the core computational node of the cerrebellum, the CC and its parallel fibers, it takes input from the cortex but does its own thing with it, it is not the cortex that say at this right moment this purkinje cell will fire to optimize behavioral output. It is more like purkinje cell listen the cortex and take a decision based on this signal. And this decision seem to be sculpted by the local plasticity induced by the IO.
And even if the cortex would be able to pilot the cerrebellum in a more active way, it will defeat the whole purposes of having a cerrebellum in the first place, which is to do quick on the spot computations that the cortex is not able to do as fast as precisely. the cerrebellum cortex being so close to the spinal chord and having fewer relay than the motor cortex to compute both plasticity and activity is another clue. So yeah this is for the fuctional argument. the cerrebellum cortex being so close

ok now that you have the background lets go for my mechanistical account. 

So we have to main input to the spinal chord, the cortex and the cerebellar cortex.

Let say the cortex is a big deep network with a model of the world that refine more slowly than the cerebellum cortex and takes more time to compute the necessary feedback loop responsible for behavior refinement.

the cerrebelar cortex is different, it is a quick feedback loop which have a "large but shallow" predictive model of the world. 

what I want to show is that as long as the cerrebellum is ALIGNED with the wants of the cortex (because at the end he is the one who knows), solving quickly internal contradictions is the only necessary thing to corect small deviation between the outputed behavior/state of the world and the desired behavior/state of the world.

How ? I have my idea but I will need numerical simulations to investigate it.

what is the idea, is based on a phenomenon that I could called target alignement for the activity side and gradient alignement for the learning side.

What are these phenomenons ? lets make a thought experiment.

Let say we have the cortex outputting teaching signals in the spinal chord which indicate which neuron should have which activity at each moment. In real biology it would not be just teaching signal but row signal that could be used to teach synapses from the cerrebellum but let SIMPLIFY it. So the cortex compute a bit slowly these signals (that could be used as row signal) based on sensory and motor and internal model feedback. good. 
If the cortex has enough precise past data it can compensate for the delay, but here is the catch, it doesn't. There is allways small deviations, sensory, and motor, and mechanistical (muscles not having the exact right output or whatever) that allways deviate the behavior from "the right behavior" and the cortex can only wait for these deviations to be old enough or compound enough to correct the behavior. This is not good for an agent that relies on instantaneous precision for survival.

We then need a second module able to operate quickly all these corrections, this is where the cerrebellum intervene.

So lets go back to the teaching signal from the neocortex, what does it teach ? Following this simplification that the cortex only output a teaching signal the logical conclusion is that it teaches the synapses directly outputed by the last computational stage of the cerrebelar cortex. Which are synapses comming from the DCN.
So in this simplified model the cerrebellum is the only instantaneous pilot and the cortex a remote pilot.

Ok so what it means is that the spinal chord neurons will learn to use whatever is outputed by the DCN to generate the right motor command at the right time.

Now, how alignement happens. lets go in the mechanical details.
for the cortex we have a deep network with sensory inputs, past motor inputs, maybe proprioceptive inputs, and backprop to train the whole rather classical.

For the cerrebelum as a whole it is slighly more exotic.
normally we could deal with that only with local plasticity, and I have my ideas, the circuit is closely mapped so it should be possible.
So in terms of architecture :

The cerrebelar cortex would be a large population of neurons receiving all to all connections from many inputs. This is a large simplification but we will rely on backprop to make structure emerge in this population. the inputs are : sensory inputs very important, motor outputs also, proprioceptive inputs if we have them in the model and potentially if we simulate the cortex as a deep network, inputs taken at various stages of this deep network (we can check actual neurological date if we want to be precise on the stages). 

The DCN is a smaller population but still high dimensional.
For the DCN we have similar inputs but to simplify the model synapses going to the DCN from these various inputs wont be plastic, to induce differentiation we will have various random weights projecting on this population. It will still be all to all inputs but the random weights with the adequate variability will induce a code spacific to any states. maybe we can even make connectivity sparse to improve code differentiation between different states. Of course the DCN is contacted by the whole CC via all to all plastic connections which will differenciate due to backpropagation.

The IO will have a very similar connection scheme from similar inputs as the CC and the DCN with also code varying due to stochasticity in synapse weights. Of course the IO is contacted by all to all plastic synapses which will differenciate due to backprop.

The DCN output to the spinal chorde with plastci synapses which will not backprop but target fitting plasticity with the target setted by the cortex as told before.

Now for the backprop, this is the most important part. During behavioral tasks the backprop will operate continuously at each time step going from the parralel fibers (connected to the inputs) all the way to the IO. Backprop will have one main objective function, uniformazing the activity in the IO (keeping it to 0) at each moment in time. This backprop target is the key of the whole system.

Here is the conceptual non trivial part that I have to explain well. An example, which will also be what I will implement in code is more than welcomed to explain the behavior. 

So lets take a simple behavioral task. we have a ball in a two D space which has to reach a random point in space that we have drawn. Our cortex can controle the acceleration on the x and y axis to do so. the cortex have acces to the ball position (sensory) to its position in space and the velocity of the ball and maybe the acceleration (proprioceptive) and thats it I guess it is enough for this simple task. the ball which is our body has a masse, we don't have frition right now, and that's it. Now let say the cortex has learned in a way (genetical algorithm/ reinforcement learning, whatever) to make the right trajectory to put the ball in the pit from any starting point. This should be easily possible through existing algorithm.

now let say that we plug the cortex to the spinal chord where are the cerrebelar outputs. Then we train the Cerrebelum/spinal chord neurons through two dynamics which takes place AT THE SAME TIME. On one side we train the spinal chord neurons to read the DCN output to reproduce the right cortex output. The spinal chord read the DCN the right way. At the same time we train the cerrebellum to iniformize whatever IO activity there is using backpropagation. We will also make the spinal chord learning slower than the cerebellar learning through backprop.
To avoid to much interference during the intial learning of the model, as the DCN code is suppose to change fast while the spinal chord learns we will proceed in two phases. First (after the cortex has learned everything) we generate many trajectory with only the cortex piloting the activity and the cerrebelar cortex is a passive listener with internal plasticity. This allow for the code in the DCN to stabilize on the right manifold. We do that a while until for all the trajectory the DCN code stabilize, changing during the trajectory but not between the trajectories. Then once the DCN code has stabilized we make the spinal chord learn to imitate the cortex output. This way everything should be stable.

Ok now we are at equilibrium, the whole system is able to output the right behavior from the cerrebellum output. Fine we have found an overcomplicated way to make what the cortex was able to do alone. But here is where magic happens (maybe).
Let say now we operate in a regime where the cortex is frozen AND spinal chord learning is frozen. lets also froze the cerrebellum learning in this first scenario to only observe what I coined the target alignement phenomenon.

Let's imagine a scenario whereby the cortex drive alone the ball most of the time until the target. Then near the target, the target or the ball itself has a small random twich. If it happen so fast that the cortex doesn't have the time to compute what to do next we will miss the target, but if instead we listen the cerrebellar cortex it will be able to extrapolate what correction to do to go in the right direction. This is a property of interpolation between known state in high dimensions. of course it is given the whole cerrebellum has been able to learn from many many trajectories. It works only on small time scale as this interpolation is not generalization per see. this is a form of high dimensional dead reconning. By just reading the high dimensional activity comming from sensory/motor/proprioceptive and generating the right code for the IO to be iniformized, the cerrebellum will output the right code and the spinal chord will read from it the right way to produce during this short period of time the right behavior. This is also a form of interpolation if we think about it.
We can imagine that in real life at every moment of a mouvement we have small deviation from the global plan computed by the cortex which operate on very fast time scale, the cerrebellum in this context will be able to smooth out any movement given that it can take the control on the spinal chord.
So yes this is the first big part.

Now for the gradient aligment phenomenon. It is a bit more subtile and has to do with cerrebellar on the fly rather fast plasticity. Here the cerrebellum not only predict the right code but the right code change, the right gradient.
So lets take our previous example. We will no reproduce many time the same trajectory multiple time with the same starting point of the ball and the same target pit for the ball. lets imagine the system is driven by the cortex but the cortex has a lag, it relies on past data few milisecond before to compute the trajectory. This is not a problem if the target is still or the ball have predictible behavior as the cortex use the speed and accelleration and distance with the pit to compute the instantaneous drive. but let say that very close to the pit the ball has a twitch or the pit move a bit, reflecting that the cortex had a slightly wrong interpretation of the pit position (very probable). catastrophe, the ball miss the pit and it takes a bit of time for the cortex to correct the trajectory, if the pit stay still and the ball doesn't twitch anymore the ball stay will finally arrive in the pit but making a detour. Imagine a predator chasing a prey, this imprecision can cost this predator survival. But wait, something happened in the cerrebellum, a miss match between the DCN and the IO has occured for a few milisecond triggering a somewhat important plasticity event. the code has changed.
Now let say we rerun exactly the same experiment, but now at the exact same moment we have the exact same twitch or the pit position modifiction we listen the synapses comming from the DCN rather than the cortical synapses. What I expect is that the code change has corrected the behavior. The trajectory lands now way closer to the target. This is behavior correction without having the cortex to be smart enough to correct quickly from its entire world model which small part of the whole behavior has been problematic, we can imagine how it can realieve the cortex to do very trick computations.

So yes you have the whole idea, I think it is both a fun code project and could be a significative improvement into our understanding of both cortex and cerrebelum functions.

A technical not on uniformizing the IO code during learning in the cerrebellum. What does that mean. It mean that The IO should have during trajectories for every trajectories each units having a fixed activity at any point in time. This activity correspond to the spontaneous activity of IO cells balancing the constant parrallel fibers potentition, that we don't simulate here as it is part of the biologically realistic backpropagation process that we skip. For the computational model we can even do something not very biorealistic but elegant which would be to have bipolar tranfer function in the IO neurons such as tangent and to aim 0 activity. This bipolar tranfer function will avoid the trivial solution of over inhibiting the IO as this would be punished by negative activity when DCN code change. But I guess if we follow this path all neurons in the model should have bipolar transfer function for it to behave well.

Of course the whole backpropagation is not biorealistic but we have clear pathway is biology to induce backprop IO->CC and others properties of backpropagation once this principal pathay taking care of could I think be emulated by sophisticated hebbian plasticity for PC->DCN. This will be as an opening in the paper, I think the whole target alignement and gradient alignement are allready a big chunk of both computational science and computational neuroscience, having all the bioplausible details delt with right now is both to heavy for my shoulders and not necessary. As long as we explain well in the oppening.

another note:
The DCN outputs are not diretly to the spinal chord this is just a simplifiction for the conversation

and another note:
WE DONT NEED the IO (or the DCN or anything) to be the direct discrepancy between the wanted behavior and the actuall behavior, it is the fact that the DCN uniformize the IO activity and fail to do so IF there is a discrepancy that makes the IO bein as an emergent property the error between whiched and what is happening. AND it is the correction of the DCN code that indirectly put the DCN code at the right place to correct the behavior either right now for target alignement or in the exact same situation in the near futur for the gradient alignement. THis is the whole point of the model and the whole claim. We bypass the troublesome fact that we need to compute the discrepency elsewhere. You have to think deeply about that. the IO signal doesn't have to be be tied to a task-relevant residual from the outside, when trying to uniformize (not set to 0 if not bipolar units) the IO activity the DCN has to learn through backprop the right projection matrix. As the DCN has a default random code making some units activated at the same moment IO units are activated, backprop will learn to "increase the gain" on the right DCN neurons and these will learn to inhibit the right IO. This is the path of less resistance for backprop. another less plausible scenario will be for backprop to ignore the priming of certain units in the DCN due to there specific inputs and just generate the right signal only through PC DCN relay. Btw the whole model also works without DCN inputs when you have backprop, to uniformize the random specific activity of the IO backprop has as an only way to create a specific code in the DCN otherwise error will emerge as there is no trivial solution to uniformaize a random code which changes at any moment in time. So yes maybe the DCN inputs are not necessary when using backprop. but for the bio realistic version with only local plasticity it is certainly. 

and another not:

what could be a counter argument: "IO uniformization alone has no reason to produce task-correct behavior unless you force the geometry to align. A network can learn to cancel IO activity using arbitrary internal codes. The spinal/motor readout may decode those codes correctly on the training manifold, but after a twitch, target jump, or delayed cortical command, the new DCN displacement could point anywhere." yes and no. if the cerebellar cortex learns interpolation from a wide variety of trajectories, after the twich, we are in a known territory, we are have just a slighlty different angle from before with a given velocity and all the other variables. High dimensionnal codes and readout given the right amount of samples are known to be able to interpolate these kind of situations it is a big part of the literature. We can't really call it generalization, it is a kind of high dimenssional interpolation. Hence the dead reckoning formulation.

another note:

When I say the code stabilizing in DCN it is to have the same code changing in time each time the we have the same trajectory from the ball and the same target point. So let say the DCN has no purkinje cell input (which makes the model worthless) the code in the DCN is 100% stable because each time we have the same trajectory we have the same code unfolding in time. What I call an unstable code is when the purkinje cells parrallel fibers or input to the DCN are still learning through plasticity which means that even for the same trajectory/target position the code actually change from one trial to another. This has to be solved by learning on many many trajectories generated by the cortex alone, and then we can have plasticity on the spinal chord learning to interpret the DCN code. by the way as said in a first prototype we don't need DCN inputs as we have backprop. It is more for the bioplausible version.

Another note :

IF we don't have bipolar coding on the IO neurons we wont target null activity/ full inhibition of the IO but rather an uniform activity aiming a scalar TO AVOID trivial solutions at all cost. Plus it correspond to actual biology.
We can even do something better, as the IO is not a computational stage per see and that we don't really care the model to have non linearity inside, we can have purely linear IO neurons and we wond have any vanishing gradients. IO neurons are not there for there non linearity but to create a target that changes based on the state of the agent thats all.

Another note :

for the slowness of the cortex we can just have it compute trajectory based on a time lagged version of sensory/proprio/motor feedback. This is cheap and will make the cortex both able to do its job at a given time scale but anabe to fix twiches on very short time scale bothe from the agent or the target.

Another note :

The take is that correction the DCN activity or changing the DCN activity will give the signal that correct the behavior. This would come potentially from many sources and CAN be enforced. first the spinal chord readout will work as the readout in a reservoir computing network, it will focus on units of the DCN which signal is usefull to predict the right behavior, this is allready a mechanism that is actually link to reservoir computing and high dimenssionallity effects. 
Then when the DCN code change it changes in units that arre correlated with the new right behavior
But this hold if the DCN is just a high dimensiion representation of the behavior, but we have a more subtle system where the code in the DCN is modulated by purkinje cells.

In theory, it is possible that signal coming from the purkinje cells shaped. it can actually try to modulate the DCN to inhibit the IO in a way that creates a very unsmooth code which would complexify the spinal chord readout to the point we lose any smoothness/generalization ability of the system. But first as itself backprop has not that much interest in doing so, making the code worse than high dimenssional representation, as the backprop has interest to keep the dimensionality similar or smaller than what is the IO and to keep the code stable (stable in my sens of stable, between trials) because this correspond by definitio to the minimal error possible.

But if even that is not enough we have a strong weapon, we can have a second term in the gradient with a lighter push than the minimization of error in the IO. We can have synaptic decay or even better regularization in the DCN aiming for code that is more similar between DCN units (more uniform code). This will push to find solutions that are way smoother that will backprop produce by itself, a form of generalization. but the code will be only as uniform as what is needed to correct the high dimensional complex code of the IO neurons which contains all the implicit correlation in the sensory/motor/proprioceptive feedbacks/inputs. 

This is just another way we can enforce smootheness/interpolation from the DCN code to ease the output reading from the spinal chord and increase alot the probability that the cerrebellum will input a vector that make sens after a twitch.

PS final model :
if we forget about listening only the cortex or only the cerrebellum which is artificial, what will be outputing the cortex is ALWAYS a laggy error signal  pointing toward the right direction but computed over more time steps. 
of course listening the cerrebelar cortex at the right moment is artificial, but in the more achieved model, as said before, it would correspond to the cerrebellum drive to stear the cortex output toward its decision. What we want ideally is the code in the spinal chord to be driven by the cerebellum on short time scale but if the cerrebellum tells something wrong, to have the cortex being able on a longer time scale (more milliseconds,seconds) to activly stear back the spinal chord code toward the right position. Which make sens, the cerrebellum change the code quickly in a way that is impredictible by the cortex, but once the cortex is able to sens the deviation and compute it it push back toward the right direction. Actually it is pretty elegant, the cortex only feed the spinal chord an error signal that both stear in the right direction if after many milliseconds things are getting side ways and the cerrebellum is teached by this error signal. So when the cortex and the cerrebellum are ok, this is mostly the cerrebellum that drives, when they disagree, first the cerrebellum drive as the cortex doesn't have the time to express the disagreement , this is where the first fold error correction from the cerrebellum happens, then if the behavior is still wrong the cortex stear the system toward the right computed behavior.